ADR for reviewer and commiter responsibilities (#44097)
quarkusio/quarkus: adr/0006-reviewer-responsibilies.adoc

= Reviewer and committer responsibilities

* Status: proposed
* Date: 2024-10-25

== Context and Problem Statement

Today, we give different roles, responsibilities and resource access across Quarkus contributors. 
It is not well known nor written down what the review and push responsibilities are and how they ares structured to achieve Quarkus goals of high code quality and velocity.

This leads to different interpretations and some unknown on how contributors can best help.
At the same time, some contributions remain unreviewed for a long time because of uncertainty or because of bottleneck.

== Decision Drivers

* Increase clarity and awareness on contributor’s responsibility on reviews and code push
* Describe the intent and not the current exact state (as tooling is preventing us from having the best solution)
* Being a perfect solution is _not_ a goal, _better_ than today is.
* Define ways to measure and improve the time to review.

> == Scenarios (optional)

Reviewer: Section to be dropped.

List of scenarios, each described using 2-3 sentences, to capture where the ADR has an impact.

== Considered options

> The main alternative is the status quo which roughly is: Guillaume knowing what we are intending to do and some persons talking with Guillaume regularly being sufficiently aware.

Reviewer: That's not true. While Guillaume provides extensive review on many areas, he is not alone to overlook the whole thing.

Author: This sentence is not talking about the review, it is talking about the process for the reviews.

== Decision

There are three levels of reviewing.

> . Any one can review a Pull Request (PR) and give constructive feedback on different areas (code, documentation, feature experience, security, etc.).

Reviewer: Is it intended to be a * ? or a 1. 

You used * above.

Author: yes because it's about 3 levels, I felt numbering was helpful. I can change if that hurts too many people.

  This is an optional but recommended step.
  More eyes means higher quality.
. A PR is reviewed by a _binding reviewer_ who is fluent in the area being touched: this person is responsible for signing with blood of the usefulness, quality of the code and soundness of the solution.
  That’s the review of the expert and the most critical one for quality.

>   This review is mandatory.

Reviewer: PRs are associated with areas (when not, they get the `need-triage` label, and it's quickly identified, and the areas are set manually). Each area has a set (sometimes a set of 1) of binding reviewers. They are listed in https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/.github/quarkus-github-bot.yml.

> .. Unfortunately, we do not always have (designed or effective) experts in all areas so it’s a constant work in progress and might make this step optional in some situations.

Reviewer: It is rarely the case - we try to avoid that as much as possible. When this happens, we require more extensive reviews from multiple reviewers (Guillaume, Georgios, George, Alexey, myself, Max...)

Author: Might be worth talking with the team, there seems to be a perception reality disconnect from some.

. A PR is reviewed by a committer (push rights) whose responsibilities are:
.. Do a general review (often from a non expert eye).
.. Ensure consistency and quality across Quarkus’s codebase (code, concepts, API consistency, documentation).
.. Detect potential security concerns with an attacker mindset (though not being an actual security professional).
.. Ensure consistency at the platform level (duplicated or overlapping features, usage integration issues across features etc).
.. Effectively push the code to the main branch.

> === TODO Open questions to resolve before closing

Reviewer: Why `TODO`?

Author: It's really the meat to discuss, we could get more proposals from others. After the conversation, I anticipated "TODO Open questions to resolve before closing" will be folded into the other sections.

Reviewer: I got some messages, and Ok, we had this situation. I'm going to improve my tooling to prevent/detect these cases (they were touching areas that my tooling was not monitoring - so it's on me).

How is a person moving from casual reviewer to binding reviewer?
People will tend to request review from binding reviewers leading to a progression problem where casual reviewers will never have the knowledge to be “promoted”.

> We have a few people with no specific area of ownership, that’s specifically acute there.

Reviewer: The "rule" is simple: You become a binding reviewer after having done reviews and also when you have contributed to the area in question and show expertise in that area. 

The number of contributions depends, and there is no magic number. That does not mean the group is close; on the contrary, it means that to become a binding reviewer, you need to contribute to show your knowledge in that area.

Author: (note to me, fold that rule into the document).

How can a non binding review see the value of its work considering someone else has to go behind them anyways.

> Feels like double work where the team is very busy.

Reviewer: I agree and disagree at the same time.
First, all reviews are appreciated, and ALL comments are discussed—no comment (except a few trolls) is dismissed without discussion. So, every review brings value. 

There is a difference between a reviewer and someone who contributed to that area. Contributing requires more knowledge of the area (global structure of the extension, conventions, anticipation of issues...).

Now, you can say there is a loophole. Imagine an area with no binding reviewer anymore. How can someone contribute if no one is there to review (you cannot review your own PR)? This is a rare situation. In general, one or more seasoned contributors start reviewing, ask questions, and make sure that the contribution is handled properly. It may take more time in this case due to the lack of deep expertise in that area (many dumb questions are asked). When an agreement is reached, the PR is merged.

How can we define SLO for the PR review to help with the _flow_, satisfy contributors while keeping quality high.
And how to use it as a mechanism to improve and know where to get help?

> The faster the flow, the high an organisation measure in effectiveness, happiness etc.

Reviewer: Here we go: DORA metrics. 

Let me get this straight—I don't believe in artificial limits. If a PR has been opened for more than n days, let's merge it. This would be terrible and insecure and, in the end, will add even more pressure on the contributors to fix and align these contributions. 

I understand that when you spend time opening a PR, getting staled for n days is not great. It happens, but again, it's not usual — at least not something I'm aware of.  

There are multiple solutions that have been implemented:

1. The lottery: Staled PRs and issues are _re-assigned_ to a set of people (by area), which allows for handling that situation and cleaning up old/out-of-date issues. 
2. Working groups—When an issue is associated with a working group, the main point of contact is responsible for making sure everything is on track. We have periodic reports to capture this. 

Finally, everyone can ping us on Zulip to discuss the issue/PR. As you say, we can be overwhelmed; these discussions let us re-prioritize and bring more people to the table.

Author: I did a quick look at the open draft PRs

29 out of 116 are more than a year old, 86 out of 116 are more than a month old (creation time).

And looking at the most recently updated (no longer creation time) and ignoring `draft` and `changes_requested`, there are 41 out of 71 that were updated in the last month and 47 in the last 3 months (24 older).

I expect false positives but by random sampling there were legit drop-off.

Reviewer: Can you provide your scripts to detect these? I would not count drafts (now, the question is what do we do with draft PRs once they are stale). Did you run your script only on quarkus "core" repo or on the other repositories too (not speaking of the quarkiverse, but the web site, quarkus-http, quarkus-security, quarkus-spring...).

> ==== Proposition 1

Reviewer: IF there is only one, let's drop the 1.

Author: It's really the meat to discuss, we could get more proposals from others. After the conversation, I anticipated "TODO Open questions to resolve before closing" will be folded into the other sections.

> Define and measure (GitHub APIs) SLO for the time to push or drop / withdraw.

Reviewer: How would you define that magic number? As explained above, raising awareness is okay (and we have the lottery for this), but taking action is NOT. 

And maybe this issue does not really exist? Do you have examples of PRs that took months to merge? It is not rare for a few weeks to be required because Quarkus has a complex (and pretty large) code base. Some PR have been discussed for multiple months, but that's a different issue.

Author: Yes look above, your comment made me do some GitHub queries to try and get some numbers around staleness.

> This is not a perfect proxy as some PRs do demand multi weeks conversations but measuring and dashboarding is our first step to know in which area we have a problem.

Reviewer: Are you volunteering? :-)

> We could define a team intended SLO (say 3 weeks to start but that’s already quite long) and know which areas chronically fall behind.

Reviewer: Three is not that long. 

There is also another issue. Let's imagine 2 PRs are opened at the same time. One gets expedited quickly and they other one is staled. There are multiple reasons for this:

- we often trust more regular contributors - that isn't very objective, but that's the reality
Some PRs are more complex to review than others. Changing the native compilation configuration can be pretty touchy and requires the reviewer to test many possibilities. 
- some PR requires expertise even binding reviewers do not have (like Windows :-)) - cross-cutting PRs can also be tricky (because it requires multiple binding reviews, and technical friction may happen)

Author: Yes, that's where it's important to have the conversation.

* what are the useful SLO (is that 90% percentile vs absolute number)
* is a latency between last user comment and committer and binding reviewer comment useful (e.g. 95% before 7 days)

And even before defining the SLO, probably defining and measuring the SLI could be useful as an indicator.

> We can introduce the notion of binding reviewer leutenants (like in the Linux kernel) where a binding reviewer whose area is not meeting the SLO would train other peoples (actively delegating the PR work as a first phase before its own review, mentoring, answering questions, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can introduce the notion of binding reviewer lieutenants (like in the Linux kernel), where a binding reviewer whose area is not meeting the SLO would train other people (actively delegating the PR work as a first phase before its own review, mentoring, answering questions, etc.).
```

Reviewer: I like the idea, but I'm not sure of the implementation. For me, even lieutenants would require a set of contributions before being named lieutenants and if they do that, they could become binding reviewers. Otherwise, it would mean that the last review (the merge part) would need to do a more extensive review (which would add even more latency)
